Data Guide
==========

Excluded Data
-------------

Laboratory tests performed through the UF Health Screen, Test, and Protect program are excluded from the data. 

Data De-identification
----------------------

To protect patients’ privacy and confidentiality, protected health information (PHI) was de-identified following `HIPAA de-identification guidelines <https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/special-topics/de-identification/index.html>`_. The Safe Harbor method was followed in all cases except for dates. ZIP codes and dates were included but obfuscation methods were applied in each case to comply with HIPAA privacy rule.  

* Only 3-digit ZIP codes are included. If the population within the corresponding Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) is less or equal to 20,000 people, the zip code is set to 000. ZCTA’s population size was based on the 2010 population census, the last available dataset at the time of writing (US Census Bureau).  

* Dates related to a patient, e.g. birth date, admission date, discharge date, and death date were ‘shifted’ by adding an X number of days, where X is a random integer in the range (-30, -1) U (1, 30). All dates related to a patient were shifted with the same number. 

* Year of birth for patients over 85 years old was set to 1800.  

* Patient identifiers were replaced with pseudo-identifiers. An autogenerated and unique person_id number was assigned to each patient and an autogenerated and unique visit_occurrence_id was assigned to each visit (encounter or interaction between the patient and health providers). The person_id and visit_occurrence_id are the primary keys that link individual patient health information from all tables in the OMOP CDM.  

* Add ‘<11’ zicode, diagnosis, race, ethnicity. 

Person
------  

The person table contains the following demographic information for each patient in the cohort. 

* **Gender.** Patient’s registered sex at birth. 
* **Race.** Most recent race reported by patient. The category *Multi-Racial* was added in March 2014 and is used when two or more valid races are recorded (excluding Not Recorded, Patient Refused, or Unknown) for the same patient. 
* **Ethnicity.** Most recent ethnicity reported by patient. Prior to February 2012 *Hispanic* was included as a choice for race. Since April 2012 *Hispanic* is considered an ethnicity.
 